docs(kraft): kraft-based upgrade and downgrade instructions (#9435)
strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator: documentation/modules/upgrading/proc-upgrade-kafka-kraft.adoc

// This module is included in the following assemblies:
//
// assembly-upgrade.adoc

[id='proc-upgrade-kafka-kraft-{context}']
= Upgrading KRaft-based Kafka clusters and client applications

[role="_abstract"]

> Upgrade a KRaft-based Strimzi Kafka cluster to the latest supported Kafka version and KRaft metadata version.

Reviewer: As people might not always upgrade only to the latest version, maybe this is clearer?

```suggestion
Upgrade a KRaft-based Strimzi Kafka cluster to a newer supported Kafka version and KRaft metadata version.
```

You should also choose a xref:con-strategies-for-upgrading-clients-{context}[strategy for upgrading clients].
Kafka clients are upgraded in step 6 of this procedure.

NOTE: Refer to the Apache Kafka documentation for the latest on support for KRaft-based upgrades.

.Prerequisites

* The Cluster Operator is up and running.
* Before you upgrade the Strimzi Kafka cluster, check that the `Kafka.spec.kafka.config` properties of the `Kafka` resource do _not_ contain configuration options that are not supported in the new Kafka version.

.Procedure

. Update the Kafka cluster configuration:
+
[source,shell,subs=+quotes]
----
kubectl edit kafka <kafka_configuration_file>
----

> . If configured, check that the `spec.kafka.metadataVersion` is set to the _current_ version.

Reviewer: I do not think it is clear what _current_ means. At this point, it should be normally set to a metadata version supported by both the old version (we use today) and new version (we want to upgrade to).

Author: changed to:   If configured, check that the current `spec.kafka.metadataVersion` is set to a version supported by the version of Kafka you are upgrading to.

+
See xref:con-versions-and-images-str[Kafka version and image mappings]

. Save and exit the editor, then wait for the rolling updates to upgrade the Kafka nodes to complete.
+
Check the progress of the rolling updates by watching the pod state transitions:
+
[source,shell,subs=+quotes]
----
kubectl get pods my-cluster-kafka-0 -o jsonpath='{.spec.containers[0].image}'
----
+
The rolling updates ensure that each pod is using the broker binaries for the new version of Kafka.

. Depending on your chosen xref:con-strategies-for-upgrading-clients-{context}[strategy for upgrading clients], upgrade all client applications to use the new version of the client binaries.
+
If required, set the `version` property for Kafka Connect and MirrorMaker as the new version of Kafka:
+
.. For Kafka Connect, update `KafkaConnect.spec.version`.
.. For MirrorMaker, update `KafkaMirrorMaker.spec.version`.
.. For MirrorMaker 2, update `KafkaMirrorMaker2.spec.version`.
+
NOTE: If you are using custom images that are built manually, you must rebuild those images to ensure that they are up-to-date with the latest Strimzi base image. 

> For example, if you xref:creating-new-image-from-base-str[created a Docker image from the base Kafka Connect image], update the Dockerfile to point to the latest base image and build configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if you xref:creating-new-image-from-base-str[created a container image from the base Kafka Connect image], update the Dockerfile to point to the latest base image and build configuration.
```

. Verify that the upgraded client applications work correctly with the new Kafka brokers.

. If configured, update the Kafka resource to use the new `metadataVersion` version. Otherwise, go to step 9.
+
For example, if upgrading to Kafka {KafkaVersionHigher}:
+
[source,yaml,subs=attributes+]
----
apiVersion: {KafkaApiVersion}
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
spec:
  kafka:
    replicas: 3
    metadataVersion: {KafkaMetadataVersionHigher}
    version: {KafkaVersionHigher}
    # ...

> ----

Reviewer: Now this is a bit tricky ... 

We should have a big warning here saying that Kafka support for downgrading the metadata version is limited and and might not be possible. And we should move here the warning part from line 80 that if you upgrade this and cannot downgrade, you might not be able to downgrade Kafka. Yet, at the same time we should make it clear that they have to eventually update the metadata version and cannot stick with the old one forever.

Author: added the following:

> WARNING: Exercise caution when changing the `metadataVersion`, as downgrading may not be possible. 
> You cannot downgrade Kafka if the `metadataVersion` for the new Kafka version is higher than the Kafka version you wish to downgrade to. 
> However, understand the potential implications on support and compatibility when maintaining an older version.
